{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f16\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f17\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f19\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f20\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}
{\f21\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f22\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f26\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}
{\f27\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;
\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\lang2057\cgrid \snext0 Normal;}{
\s1\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \b\fs20\lang2057\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \b\i\f1\lang2057\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\li283\sb119\sa240\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \b\f1\lang2057 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\s15\li340\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tqr\tldot\tx8296\adjustright \i\fs20\lang1024\cgrid 
\sbasedon0 \snext0 \sautoupd toc 3;}{\s16\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\lang2057\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext0 \sautoupd toc 1;}{\s17\li284\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\lang1024\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext0 \sautoupd toc 2;}}{\info
{\title Aircraft Texture Formats used by FS2002}{\author Martin Wright}{\operator Martin Wright}{\creatim\yr2003\mo7\dy13\hr12\min41}{\revtim\yr2003\mo7\dy13\hr17\min8}{\printim\yr2003\mo4\dy20\hr11\min13}{\version11}{\edmins76}{\nofpages2}{\nofwords561}
{\nofchars3199}{\*\company MW Graphics}{\nofcharsws3928}{\vern71}}\paperw11906\paperh16838 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0\formshade\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot \fet0\sectd \linex0\headery709\footery709\colsx709\endnhere\sectdefaultcl 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \s3\li283\sb119\sa240\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel2\adjustright \b\f1\lang2057 {Texture Formats used by CFS3
\par }\pard\plain \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\lang2057\cgrid {
\par It is recommended that you read the \ldblquote Texture Formats used by FS2002\rdblquote  document for a full overview of textures generally and the function of Alpha channels.
\par 
\par CFS3 was a new departure in the series of Microsoft Flight Simulators.
\par 
\par A new display engine was created for it instead of the previous method of taking and enhancing the current \ldblquote Flight Simulator\rdblquote 
 version. This has many results including the total loss of any cross-compatibility (or backward-compatibility) with an
y other version of Flight Simulator or Combat Flight Simulator. It has however given the developers the chance to rewrite everything from the ground up in a fashion optimised for combat flight. As to whether they succeeded or not\'85\'85.
\par 
\par One feature of this to
tal rebuild is that they have gone over fully to DDS (DirectX DirectDrawSurface) textures. These are standard across a wide variety of games because they are the native internal format of DirectX and can be handled much more efficiently by the display cod
e.
\par 
\par DDS comes in many variations. The most common is DXT1 but it also supports virtually all the 16 and 32 bit formats as used in FS2002/4.  See the FS2002 Texture document for a full description of the various internal formats.
\par 
\par Unlike other versions of Flight Simulator CFS3 also supports the DDS DXT5 (interpolated alpha) format. This appears often in textures that require a more varied alpha (cloud textures are a prime example).
\par 
\par It also seems that CFS3 expects textures to be square. I haven`t really tested it but all the default textures are square.
\par 
\par CFS3 differs from FS2002 in the way it applies Reflections and  specularity. Whereas FS2002 used the Alpha channel of the main texture to define transparency or reflection CFS3 uses separate \ldblquote map\rdblquote  textures to perform the functions. 

\par 
\par In CFS3 aircraft the main texture is the one whose name ends _t.dds and is accompanied by one or more other textures that define various maps to overlay.
\par 
\par Taking the B26 as an example you will see the following textures :-
\par 
\par 
\par }\trowd \trgaph108\trleft284\trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrh\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrv\brdrs\brdrw10 \clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrr
\brdrs\brdrw10 \cltxlrtb \cellx2410\clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \cltxlrtb \cellx3402\clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrr
\brdrs\brdrw10 \cltxlrtb \cellx7938\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {B26c_t.dds\cell DXT1\cell The main texture\cell }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {\row }\trowd \trgaph108\trleft284\trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrl
\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrh\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrv\brdrs\brdrw10 \clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \cltxlrtb \cellx2410\clvertalt\clbrdrt
\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \cltxlrtb \cellx3402\clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \cltxlrtb \cellx7938\pard 
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {B26c_t_damage.dds\cell DXT1\cell A map of Damage \ldblquote holes\rdblquote  to apply to the main texture when the aircraft has been damaged on a particular part\cell }\pard 
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {\row }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {B26c_s.dds\cell DXT1\cell A map of specularity (or shine) to apply to the main texture in conjunction with the current lighting in CFS3\cell }\pard 
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {\row }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {B26c_r.dds\cell DXT1\cell A map of reflection to apply to the main texture\cell }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {\row }\trowd 
\trgaph108\trleft284\trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrh\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrv\brdrs\brdrw10 \clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrr
\brdrs\brdrw10 \cltxlrtb \cellx2410\clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \cltxlrtb \cellx3402\clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrr
\brdrs\brdrw10 \cltxlrtb \cellx7938\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {B26c_ct_bw_xxxx.dds\cell DXT1\cell A number of textures th
at are used to apply the coloured bands (eg B26c_ct_bw_wingtop.dds, B26c_ct_bw_tail.dds etc). These are usually just black and white \ldblquote cutout\rdblquote  maps that mask off the areas to apply colour changes to when the user selects a different 
\ldblquote Paint\rdblquote \cell }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {\row }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {
\par As well as these pure texture files aircraft will also have a MOS file. This is a Mosaic file that provides all the information for mapping the coloured stripes, wingtips, flashes and Noseart. It also provides information about where to map \ldblquote 
bullethole\rdblquote  decals when the plane has been hit in various places.
\par The filename usually matches the filename for the main aircraft texture For the B26 this file is \ldblquote B26c_t.mos\rdblquote 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\outlinelevel1\adjustright \b\i\f1\lang2057\cgrid {Important note about CFS3 texture handling
\par }\pard\plain \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\lang2057\cgrid {
\par Unlike other Flight Simulator versions CFS3 has no specific location for textures. They may be placed anywhere in any of the CFS3 folders and they will still be found and used.
\par 
\par This \ldblquote feature\rdblquote  has given rise to much confusion. 
\par 
\par People have repainted existing aircraft by moving the current main texture to a storage folder and replacing it in the Aircraft`s folder with a repainted version. If the storage folder is anywhere inside the main CFS3 fol
der then they find that the aircraft still appears showing the \ldblquote old\rdblquote  paint.
\par 
\par People have tried to make different versions of the same aircraft by creating a copy of the whole folder for that aircraft and then editing the textures.  Again they are finding that their \ldblquote new\rdblquote  
aircraft appearing with the same texture as the old one.
\par 
\par  
\par }}